Preface {#preface .unnumbered}
=======

The title of this book, *Lojban for Humans*, has several meanings. In
particular, it is meant as a tongue-in-cheek reference to how cryptic
some language-learning texts can be. With regards to Lojban, there is
arguably *one*, main book: *The Complete Lojban Language* (CLL). @CLL
The CLL is an excellent book with plenty of value for learning, but it
tries to fulfill multiple roles – as a tool for teaching Lojban, and as
a complete description of the Lojban language. Since it functions as a
specification for a language, it is forced to take a structure that can
frustrate even the dedicated student.

This book is meant to be for Lojban what *Wheelock’s Latin*
@WheelocksLatin was for Latin. It is meant to bridge the gap between
beginners and experts. As such, this book strives to be, as Wheelock
said of his own book, “a beginner’s book which is mature, humanistic,
challenging, and instructive, which at the same time is reasonable in
its demands.” @WheelocksLatin [Preface, p. xiii]

In addition to teaching Lojban, this books aims to teach the basic
concepts necessary to *understand* language. Just as *Wheelock’s Latin*
often teaches English speakers for the first time basic concepts of
language, such as grammatical cases, this book aims to elevate the
general language knowledge of the reader. Learning Lojban is a great
opportunity for exploring language itself, and where possible the reader
will be given the introduction to new concepts as needed, and references
to where they could learn more if they were so inclined.

Additionally, this book will focus on providing examples and building up
vocabulary as grammatical concepts are introduced. To separate this work
from the already thorough, deductive approach *The Complete Lojban
Language* takes, this book will give readers words to play with and
interesting texts to translate and use. As with any language, practice
is extremely important, and as such it will form a core part of this
book.

Introduction
============

ni’o ni’o no mo’o

A Brief History of Lojban
-------------------------

Lojban is a constructed language. This means its structure is artificial
– designed with a top-down approach, like how a building is architected
or a law is drafted. This differs from natural languages, which evolved
organically, like DNA. [^1]

Work to create Lojban was started in 1987 by the Logical Language Group.
It was based on a linguistic project that produced a constructed
language called *Loglan*. The creator of Loglan wanted to keep the
language proprietary and did not want other people to use it openly. As
a result a group of people created Lojban in the spirit of Loglan but
open and free.

### Loglan

Loglan was created in 1955 by James Cooke Brown. He created the language
to conduct linguistic research to investigate the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis.

The **Sapir-Whorf hypothesis**, also known as *the principle of
linguistic relativity*, is the idea that one’s language impacts one’s
way of thinking, or one’s perception of the world.

The goal of the research was to test whether an artificial language
could be designed that was so different from natural languages that
speakers of this new language would think differently, thus testing the
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.

To develop Loglan, Brown created **The Loglan Institute** (TLI). He
wrote many papers about the design of Loglan, but the project was never
considered complete. Because Brown claimed legal restrictions on the use
of Loglan, the Logical Language Group was formed by followers of Brown
and they split away from The Loglan Institute.

Though Brown claimed legal restriction on the language, the United
States Patent and Trademark Office eventually ruled that Loglan was not
able to be restricted the ways Brown claimed. However, this ruling came
after the Logical Language Group had split from The Loglan Institute,
and by then Loglan had been abandoned for a new language: Lojban.

#### The Design Goals of Loglan

The direct goal of Loglan was to test whether a logical language could
cause people speaking that language to think more logically.

The grammar of Loglan, thus, is based on predicate logic – in the spirit
of Leibniz’s *universal symbolism*, by which Leibniz predicted “the
rational powers of man would be marvelously extended.” @BrownSci

It was designed to be easy to teach and use, but sophisticated enough to
let people effectively use the language as they would a natural
language.

The language was also designed to be culturally neutral. Despite this,
words are constructed from elements of semantically related words from
the eight most widely spoken languages on Earth, to make the language
easier to learn. [^2]

It was also meant to require of the speaker as few obligatory categories
as possible. For example, in English it is impossible to express a
finite verb without expressing the tense of that verb, making the time
tense a obligatory category. Loglan attempted to avoid these obligatory
categories as much as possible.

The language was designed to be parsed in only one way and to be
unambiguous.

The syllabic structure of words was designed so that a sequence of
syllables could be separated into words in only one way, even if not
clear from pauses in speech.

The language has a small number of phonemes so that regional accents
would be less likely to render speech unintelligible.

#### The Importance of Unambiguous Language

Steven Pinker illustrates the importance of unambiguous language in a
lecture of his. On one hand, we have a rather non-controversial
statement:

> Conan discusses **sex**\
> with Dr. Ruth

In this quote, Conan is going to discuss with his guest the topic of sex
(the topic is in bold). However, this sentence is ambiguous in its
current form, and could be interpreted in an unintended and embarrassing
way:

> Conan discusses\
> **sex with Dr. Ruth**

Now the sentence seems to state that Conan is going to discuss the topic
of *sex with Dr. Ruth*, something likely not intended as the original
meaning, but not an impossible interpretation nonetheless. @PinkerWindow
[22:58]

Writing and Pronunciation
-------------------------

Basic pronunciation is covered in *The Complete Lojban Language* @CLL
[Chapter 2, p. 16]

A more thorough examination of Lojban phonetics can be found in the *The
Complete Lojban Language* @CLL [Chapter 3, p. 34]

### Orthography

The conventions for writing a language, such as rules about spelling,
capitalization, and punctuation, constitutes a language’s
**orthography**, or “rules for writing”. [^3]

#### Phonemic Orthography

In Lojban, all sounds of the spoken language correspond to one,
unambiguous written equivalent. This means that consonants and vowels
don’t have multiple possible pronunciations, unlike English.

As an example of how different sounds in English can take different
written forms, let’s explore the word *fish*. In English you can find
the sound of **f** in *fish* in the letters **gh** in *enough* and
*tough*. The sound made by the **i** in *fish* can also be found as
**o** in w**o**men. Finally, the sound made by the letters **sh** in
*fish* can be found as **ti** in na**ti**on and mo**ti**on. In the end
you should, logically, be able to represent the word *fish* just as well
in English with the re-spelling *ghoti*[^4] Of course this is absurd,
but so are the rules of English pronunciation!

Lojban avoids this ambiguity by allowing only one possible letter or set
of letters for each possible sound.

### Vowels

Vowels are pronounced in ways that are likely already familiar to you.

 
:   **a** as in f**a**ther, *mlatu* – cat

 
:   **e** as in p**e**t, *gerku* – dog

 
:   **i** as in mach**i**ne, *mi* – me

 
:   **o** as in cl**o**ver, *voksa* – voice

 
:   **u** as in r**u**de, *sutra* – fast

 
:   **y** as in the **a** in **a**bout or **a**round

### Dipthongs

Dipthongs are a combination of two vowel sounds that collapse together
to make one single syllable.

 
:   **ai** as in **ai**sle

 
:   **ei** as in the **ey** in th**ey**

 
:   **oi** as in the **oy** in t**oy**

 
:   **au** as in the **ow** in c**ow**

#### Dipthongs Starting with I

In Lojban, **i** often takes on a quality like the English **y**. For
example, in English **y** before a vowel often forms a dipthong,
exemplified by words like *yes*, *yarrow*, and *yonder*. As a rule, in
Lojban, when **i** comes before a vowel, it has the same effect, for
example *.iu* in Lojban is pronounced like the English word *you*.

 
:   **ia** as in **ya**wn

 
:   **ie** as in **ye**s

 
:   **ii** as in **yi**eld

 
:   **io** as in **yo**-**yo**

 
:   **iu** as in **you**

#### Dipthongs Starting with U

Similar to the rules about **i** dipthongs, vowels occuring after **u**
behave as **w** in English, e.g. **wa**ter, **We**dnesday, **wi**sh.

 
:   **ua** as in **wa**ter

 
:   **ue** as in **we**st

 
:   **ui** as in **we**

 
:   **uo** as in **wo**ah or **Wo**din

 
:   **uu** as in **wu** or **woo**

### Consonants

There are a few irregular consonants in Lojban. Lojban only pronounces
**c** like the **sh** sound in English.

 
:   **c** as in fa**c**ial, *citka* – to eat

 
:   **j** as in the **s** in plea**s**ure, *jitfa* – false

 
:   **g** as in **g**ift, *gunka* – work

 
:   **x** as in **ch** in lo**ch**, *xruti* – to return, *fraxu* – to
    forgive

Glossary
========

Languages are represented by their ISO 639-1 codes. See the
Abbreviations chapter of the appendix for a list of the codes used in
this book. [^5]

The entry of the glossary has:

1.  The word you are looking up in bold (e.g. **mlatu**)

2.  Its gloss equivalent in italics (e.g. *cat*)

3.  The “etymology” for the Lojban word. Each natural language word is
    represented in the Lojban alphabet, e.g. the word cat would be
    written *kat* according to how it would sound and be written in
    Lojban. The language code comes before each natural language word,
    indicating what language the word is from. The phonetic parts that
    were used from the natural-language word, to create the Lojban word,
    are in bold. For example, from the English word “c**at**”, only
    “**at**” was used in “ml**at**u”. The full example you would see in
    the entry for *mlatu* would be:

    (en: k**at**, zh: **mau**, hi: bi**la**r, es: g**at**, ar: k**at**)

4.  The full definition of the word, e.g. x~1~ is a cat [/ puss / pussy
    / kitten] [feline animal] of species / breed x~2~

In the Lojban to English section, the entry for *cat* would look like
this:

> **mlatu**, *cat* (en: k**at**, zh: **mau**, hi: bi**la**r, es:
> g**at**, ar: k**at**) – x~1~ is a cat [/ puss / pussy / kitten]
> [feline animal] of species / breed x~2~

Lojban to English Vocabulary
----------------------------

...

### A

 
:   

### B

 
:   

### C

 
:   

### D

 
:   

### E

 
:   

### F

 
:   

### G

 
:   

### H

 
:   

### I

 
:   

### J

 
:   

### K

 
:   

### L

 
:   

### M

 
:   **mlatu**, *cat* (en: k**at**, zh: **mau**, hi: bi**la**r, es:
    g**at**, ar: k**at**) – x~1~ is a cat [/ puss / pussy / kitten]
    [feline animal] of species / breed x~2~

### N

 
:   

### O

 
:   

### P

 
:   **plise**, *apple* (en: a**pl**, zh: **pi**ngu**e**, hi: **se**b) –
    x~1~ is an apple [fruit] of species / strain x~2~.

### Q

 
:   

### R

 
:   

### S

 
:   

### T

 
:   **troci**, *try* (en: **tr**a**i**, zh: **ci**, hi: k**oci**c, es:
    p**ro**b) – x~1~ tries / attempts / makes an effort to do / attain
    x~2~ (event / state / property) by actions / method x~3~.

### U

 
:   

### V

 
:   

### W

 
:   

### X

 
:   **xamgu**, *good* (en: **gu**d, zh: **xau**, hi: ut**am**, ru:
    **xa**roc, ar: **xa**iid) – x~1~ (object / event) is good /
    beneficial / nice / [acceptable] for x~2~ by standard x~3~

### Y

 
:   

### Z

 
:   

English to Lojban Vocabulary
----------------------------

The English to Lojban section only provides the Lojban word for the
equivalent glossed word in English. For more information about that
word, look it up in the Lojban to English vocabulary section.

### A

 
:   **abdomen**, *betfu*

 
:   **able**, *kakne*

 
:   **above**, *gapru*

 
:   **abstract**, *sucta*

 
:   **accidental**, *snuti*

 
:   **account**, *janta*

 
:   **acid**, *slami*

 
:   **acre**, *kramu*

 
:   **across**, *ragve*

 
:   **act**, *zukte*

 
:   **address**, *judri*

 
:   **add**, *jmina*

 
:   **adjacent**, *lamji*

 
:   **adjust**, *stika*

 
:   **adorn**, *jadni*

 
:   **affair**, *cuntu*

 
:   **affix compound**, *lujvo*

 
:   **affix**, *rafsi*

 
:   **African**, *friko*

 
:   **agree**, *tugni*

 
:   **airplane**, *vinji*

 
:   **air**, *vacri*

 
:   **alcohol**, *xalka*

 
:   **alien**, *fange*

 
:   **alkali**, *jilka*

 
:   **alternation**, *vlina*

 
:   **American**, *merko*

 
:   **ampere**, *xampo*

 
:   **amphibian**, *banfi*

 
:   **amusing**, *zdile*

 
:   **analyze**, *lanli*

 
:   **angle**, *jganu*

 
:   **angry**, *fengu*

 
:   **anguish**, *dunku*

 
:   **animal**, *danlu*

 
:   **annoy**, *fanza*

 
:   **answer**, *danfu*

 
:   **Antarctican**, *dzipo*

 
:   **ant**, *manti*

 
:   **anus**, *ganxo*

 
:   **apart**, *sepli*

 
:   **apparatus**, *cabra*

 
:   **apple**, *plise*

 
:   **approve**, *zanru*

 
:   **Arabic**, *xrabo*

 
:   **arch**, *bargu*

 
:   **Argentinian**, *gento*

 
:   **argue**, *darlu*

 
:   **argument**, *sumti*

 
:   **arm**, *birka*

 
:   **army**, *jenmi*

 
:   **article**, *gadri*

 
:   **artifact**, *rutni*

 
:   **art**, *larcu*

 
:   **ashamed**, *ckeji*

 
:   **Asiatic**, *xazdo*

 
:   **assert**, *xusra*

 
:   **assume**, *sruma*

 
:   **atom**, *ratni*

 
:   **attack**, *gunta*

 
:   **attentive**, *jundi*

 
:   **at**, *zvati*

 
:   **attract**, *trina*

 
:   **audacity**, *darsi*

 
:   **aunt or uncle**, *famti*

 
:   **Australian**, *sralo*

 
:   **authority**, *catni*

 
:   **automatic**, *zmiku*

 
:   **autumn**, *critu*

 
:   **avoid**, *rivbi*

 
:   **awake**, *cikna*

 
:   **axle**, *jendu*

### B

 
:   **bad**, *xlali*

 
:   **balance**, *lanxe*

 
:   **balcony**, *balni*

 
:   **ball**, *bolci*

 
:   **banana**, *badna*

 
:   **bank**, *banxa*

 
:   **bare**, *lunbe*

 
:   **barley**, *bavmi*

 
:   **bar**, *barja*

 
:   **basis**, *jicmu*

 
:   **basket**, *lanka*

 
:   **bay**, *zbani*

 
:   **bead**, *bidju*

 
:   **bean**, *dembi*

 
:   **bear**, *cribe*

 
:   **beautiful**, *melbi*

 
:   **become**, *binxo*

 
:   **bed**, *ckana*

 
:   **beer**, *birje*

 
:   **bee**, *bifce*

 
:   **beg**, *pikci*

 
:   **behave**, *tarti*

 
:   **behind**, *trixe*

 
:   **believe**, *krici*

 
:   **bell**, *janbe*

 
:   **beneath**, *cnita*

 
:   **Bengali**, *bengo*

 
:   **bent**, *korcu*

 
:   **berry**, *jbari*

 
:   **between**, *jbini*

 
:   **beyond**, *bancu*

 
:   **big**, *barda*

 
:   **billion, 1E9**, *gigdo*

 
:   **bird**, *cipni*

 
:   **bite**, *batci*

 
:   **bitter**, *kurki*

 
:   **black**, *xekri*

 
:   **blade**, *balre*

 
:   **block**, *bliku*

 
:   **blood**, *ciblu*

 
:   **blue**, *blanu*

 
:   **board**, *tanbo*

 
:   **boat**, *bloti*

 
:   **body**, *xadni*

 
:   **boil**, *febvi*

 
:   **bomb**, *jbama*

 
:   **bone**, *bongu*

 
:   **book**, *cukta*

 
:   **born**, *jbena*

 
:   **borrow**, *jbera*

 
:   **bottle**, *botpi*

 
:   **bovine**, *bakni*

 
:   **box**, *tanxe*

 
:   **boy**, *nanla*

 
:   **brain**, *besna*

 
:   **brake**, *jabre*

 
:   **branch**, *jimca*

 
:   **brass**, *lastu*

 
:   **brave**, *virnu*

 
:   **Brazilian**, *brazo*

 
:   **bread**, *nanba*

 
:   **break**, *porpi*

 
:   **breast**, *tatru*

 
:   **breathe**, *vasxu*

 
:   **breeze**, *brife*

 
:   **bridge**, *cripu*

 
:   **British**, *brito*

 
:   **broad**, *ganra*

 
:   **broken**, *spofu*

 
:   **bronze**, *ransu*

 
:   **brother**, *bruna*

 
:   **brown**, *bunre*

 
:   **brow**, *mebri*

 
:   **brush**, *burcu*

 
:   **bucket**, *baktu*

 
:   **buckwheat**, *xruba*

 
:   **Buddhist**, *budjo*

 
:   **building**, *dinju*

 
:   **bulb**, *balji*

 
:   **bundle**, *bakfu*

 
:   **burn**, *jelca*

 
:   **butterfly**, *toldi*

 
:   **butter**, *matne*

 
:   **buttock**, *zargu*

 
:   **button**, *batke*

### C

 
:   **cabbage**, *kobli*

 
:   **cabin**, *sabnu*

 
:   **calculate**, *kanji*

 
:   **camel**, *kumte*

 
:   **camera**, *kacma*

 
:   **camp**, *ginka*

 
:   **Canadian**, *kadno*

 
:   **canal**, *naxle*

 
:   **cancer**, *kenra*

 
:   **can**, *lante*

 
:   **captain**, *jatna*

 
:   **cap**, *mapku*

 
:   **capture**, *kavbu*

 
:   **carbon**, *tabno*

 
:   **card**, *karda*

 
:   **carry**, *bevri*

 
:   **car**, *karce*

 
:   **cart**, *carce*

 
:   **cassava**, *samcu*

 
:   **cat**, *mlatu*

 
:   **cause**, *rinka*

 
:   **cavity**, *kevna*

 
:   **cease**, *sisti*

 
:   **celebrate**, *salci*

 
:   **cell**, *selci*

 
:   **cent**, *fepni*

 
:   **ceramic**, *staku*

 
:   **certain**, *birti*

 
:   **chain**, *linsi*

 
:   **chair**, *stizu*

 
:   **chalk**, *bakri*

 
:   **challenge**, *talsa*

 
:   **chaotic**, *kalsa*

 
:   **chart**, *cartu*

 
:   **chase**, *jersi*

 
:   **cheese**, *cirla*

 
:   **chemical**, *xukmi*

 
:   **chest**, *cutne*

 
:   **chicken**, *jipci*

 
:   **child**, *verba*

 
:   **Chinese**, *jungo*

 
:   **chocolate**, *cakla*

 
:   **choose**, *cuxna*

 
:   **Christian**, *xriso*

 
:   **chrome**, *romge*

 
:   **cigar**, *sigja*

 
:   **cinema**, *skina*

 
:   **cite**, *sitna*

 
:   **citrus**, *nimre*

 
:   **city**, *tcadu*

 
:   **class**, *klesi*

 
:   **claw**, *jgalu*

 
:   **clay**, *kliti*

 
:   **clean**, *jinsa*

 
:   **clear**, *klina*

 
:   **climb**, *cpare*

 
:   **clock**, *junla*

 
:   **closed**, *ganlo*

 
:   **cloth**, *bukpu*

 
:   **cloud**, *dilnu*

 
:   **clumsy**, *juxre*

 
:   **coal**, *kolme*

 
:   **coat**, *kosta*

 
:   **cockroach**, *jalra*

 
:   **code**, *mifra*

 
:   **coffee**, *ckafi*

 
:   **coin**, *sicni*

 
:   **cold**, *lenku*

 
:   **collar**, *karli*

 
:   **collide**, *janli*

 
:   **color**, *skari*

 
:   **column**, *kamju*

 
:   **comb**, *komcu*

 
:   **come**, *klama*

 
:   **comfort**, *kufra*

 
:   **command**, *minde*

 
:   **comment**, *pinka*

 
:   **committee**, *kamni*

 
:   **common**, *kampu*

 
:   **community**, *cecmu*

 
:   **company**, *kagni*

 
:   **compare**, *karbi*

 
:   **compete**, *jivna*

 
:   **complete**, *mulno*

 
:   **complicated**, *pluja*

 
:   **computer**, *skami*

 
:   **condense**, *lunsa*

 
:   **cone**, *konju*

 
:   **confusing**, *cfipu*

 
:   **conifer**, *ckunu*

 
:   **conjunction**, *kanxe*

 
:   **conscious**, *sanji*

 
:   **constant**, *stodi*

 
:   **contain**, *vasru*

 
:   **continue**, *ranji*

 
:   **control**, *jitro*

 
:   **cook**, *jukpa*

 
:   **copper**, *tunka*

 
:   **copulate**, *gletu*

 
:   **copy**, *fukpi*

 
:   **cord**, *skori*

 
:   **corner**, *kojna*

 
:   **correct**, *drani*

 
:   **costly**, *kargu*

 
:   **cotton**, *mapni*

 
:   **cough**, *kafke*

 
:   **country**, *gugde*

 
:   **count**, *kancu*

 
:   **cousin**, *tamne*

 
:   **cover**, *gacri*

 
:   **crack**, *fenra*

 
:   **crazy**, *fenki*

 
:   **cream**, *kruji*

 
:   **crew**, *bende*

 
:   **crime**, *zekri*

 
:   **cruel**, *kusru*

 
:   **crust**, *pilka*

 
:   **cry out**, *krixa*

 
:   **crystal**, *krili*

 
:   **cube**, *kubli*

 
:   **cubit**, *gutci*

 
:   **culture**, *kulnu*

 
:   **cup**, *kabri*

 
:   **curious**, *kucli*

 
:   **curse**, *dapma*

 
:   **curtain**, *murta*

 
:   **curve**, *kruvi*

 
:   **cushion**, *kicne*

 
:   **custom**, *tcaci*

 
:   **cut**, *katna*

 
:   **cyan**, *cicna*

 
:   **cylinder**, *slanu*

### D

 
:   **dance**, *dansu*

 
:   **dark**, *manku*

 
:   **data**, *datni*

 
:   **date**, *detri*

 
:   **daughter**, *tixnu*

 
:   **day**, *djedi*

 
:   **daytime**, *donri*

 
:   **dead**, *morsi*

 
:   **dear**, *dirba*

 
:   **deceive**, *tcica*

 
:   **decide**, *jdice*

 
:   **decimal**, *saclu*

 
:   **decrease**, *jdika*

 
:   **deep**, *condi*

 
:   **deer**, *mirli*

 
:   **defend**, *bandu*

 
:   **delicate**, *ralci*

 
:   **delicious**, *kukte*

 
:   **dense**, *denmi*

 
:   **deny**, *natfe*

 
:   **deputy**, *vipsi*

 
:   **derogative**, *mabla*

 
:   **describe**, *skicu*

 
:   **desire**, *djica*

 
:   **destroy**, *daspo*

 
:   **detail**, *tcila*

 
:   **develop**, *farvi*

 
:   **differ**, *frica*

 
:   **difficult**, *nandu*

 
:   **dig**, *kakpa*

 
:   **dimension**, *cimde*

 
:   **dim**, *kandi*

 
:   **diplomat**, *jansu*

 
:   **direction**, *farna*

 
:   **dirt**, *dertu*

 
:   **discover**, *facki*

 
:   **discuss**, *casnu*

 
:   **disgusting**, *rigni*

 
:   **dissolve**, *runta*

 
:   **distribute**, *fatri*

 
:   **dive**, *sfubu*

 
:   **divide**, *fendi*

 
:   **doctor**, *mikce*

 
:   **dog**, *gerku*

 
:   **dollar**, *rupnu*

 
:   **donkey**, *xasli*

 
:   **door**, *vorme*

 
:   **do**, *gasnu*

 
:   **doubt**, *senpi*

 
:   **drain**, *rinci*

 
:   **drama**, *draci*

 
:   **drawer**, *dacru*

 
:   **dream**, *senva*

 
:   **drink**, *pinxe*

 
:   **drop**, *dirgo*

 
:   **drum**, *damri*

 
:   **dry**, *sudga*

 
:   **duck**, *datka*

 
:   **dust**, *pulce*

 
:   **dwell**, *xabju*

### E

 
:   **early**, *clira*

 
:   **earn**, *jerna*

 
:   **ear**, *kerlo*

 
:   **earth**, *terdi*

 
:   **east**, *stuna*

 
:   **easy**, *frili*

 
:   **eat**, *citka*

 
:   **edge**, *korbi*

 
:   **egg**, *sovda*

 
:   **Egyptian**, *misro*

 
:   **elastic**, *pruni*

 
:   **elder**, *dzena*

 
:   **electric**, *dikca*

 
:   **elephant**, *xanto*

 
:   **embarrassed**, *burna*

 
:   **embryo**, *tarbi*

 
:   **emotion**, *cinmo*

 
:   **emphasize**, *basna*

 
:   **empty**, *kunti*

 
:   **end**, *fanmo*

 
:   **enemy**, *bradi*

 
:   **energy**, *nejni*

 
:   **English**, *glico*

 
:   **environment**, *vanbi*

 
:   **equal**, *dunli*

 
:   **era**, *cedra*

 
:   **err**, *srera*

 
:   **esteem**, *sinma*

 
:   **European**, *ropno*

 
:   **evening**, *vanci*

 
:   **event**, *fasnu*

 
:   **evil**, *palci*

 
:   **exa, 1E18**, *xexso*

 
:   **exact**, *satci*

 
:   **example**, *mupli*

 
:   **excess**, *dukse*

 
:   **exchange**, *canja*

 
:   **excrete**, *vikmi*

 
:   **exist**, *zasti*

 
:   **experience**, *lifri*

 
:   **expert**, *certu*

 
:   **explain**, *ciksi*

 
:   **explode**, *spoja*

 
:   **exponential**, *tenfa*

 
:   **express**, *cusku*

 
:   **eye**, *kanla*

### F

 
:   **face**, *flira*

 
:   **factory**, *fanri*

 
:   **fact**, *fatci*

 
:   **fail**, *fliba*

 
:   **fairy**, *crida*

 
:   **fall**, *farlu*

 
:   **false**, *jitfa*

 
:   **family**, *lanzu*

 
:   **famous**, *misno*

 
:   **farm**, *cange*

 
:   **far**, *darno*

 
:   **fasten**, *lasna*

 
:   **fast**, *sutra*

 
:   **fate**, *dimna*

 
:   **father**, *patfu*

 
:   **favorable**, *zabna*

 
:   **fear**, *terpa*

 
:   **feather**, *pimlu*

 
:   **feces**, *kalci*

 
:   **female**, *fetsi*

 
:   **femto, 1E-15**, *femti*

 
:   **fertile**, *ferti*

 
:   **fiction**, *cfika*

 
:   **field**, *foldi*

 
:   **fight**, *damba*

 
:   **fig**, *figre*

 
:   **fill**, *tisna*

 
:   **finger**, *degji*

 
:   **fire**, *fagri*

 
:   **firm**, *jdari*

 
:   **fish**, *finpe*

 
:   **fit**, *mapti*

 
:   **flag**, *lanci*

 
:   **flaw**, *cfila*

 
:   **flight**, *vofli*

 
:   **float**, *fulta*

 
:   **floor**, *loldi*

 
:   **flower**, *xrula*

 
:   **flow**, *flecu*

 
:   **flute**, *flani*

 
:   **fly**, *sfani*

 
:   **foam**, *fonmo*

 
:   **fog**, *bumru*

 
:   **fold**, *polje*

 
:   **fond**, *nelci*

 
:   **food**, *cidja*

 
:   **foolish**, *bebna*

 
:   **foot**, *jamfu*

 
:   **force**, *bapli*

 
:   **forgive**, *fraxu*

 
:   **fork**, *forca*

 
:   **fox**, *lorxu*

 
:   **fraction**, *frinu*

 
:   **frame**, *greku*

 
:   **free**, *zifre*

 
:   **freeze**, *dunja*

 
:   **French**, *fraso*

 
:   **fresh**, *vifne*

 
:   **friction**, *mosra*

 
:   **friend**, *pendo*

 
:   **front**, *crane*

 
:   **frown**, *frumu*

 
:   **fruit**, *grute*

 
:   **frustration**, *steba*

 
:   **fuel**, *livla*

 
:   **full**, *culno*

 
:   **function**, *fancu*

 
:   **funny**, *xajmi*

 
:   **furniture**, *nilce*

 
:   **future**, *balvi*

### G

 
:   **gallon**, *dekpu*

 
:   **garden**, *purdi*

 
:   **garlic**, *sunga*

 
:   **garment**, *taxfu*

 
:   **gas**, *gapci*

 
:   **gather**, *jmaji*

 
:   **gem**, *jemna*

 
:   **gene**, *jgina*

 
:   **German**, *dotco*

 
:   **germ**, *jurme*

 
:   **get**, *cpacu*

 
:   **girl**, *nixli*

 
:   **give**, *dunda*

 
:   **gland**, *cigla*

 
:   **glass**, *blaci*

 
:   **glimmering**, *murse*

 
:   **glove**, *gluta*

 
:   **goat**, *kanba*

 
:   **god**, *cevni*

 
:   **gold**, *solji*

 
:   **good**, *xamgu*

 
:   **goose**, *gunse*

 
:   **govern**, *turni*

 
:   **grain**, *gurni*

 
:   **grammar**, *gerna*

 
:   **gram**, *grake*

 
:   **grasp**, *jgari*

 
:   **grass**, *srasu*

 
:   **grateful**, *ckire*

 
:   **gray**, *grusi*

 
:   **grease**, *grasu*

 
:   **great**, *banli*

 
:   **Greek**, *xelso*

 
:   **green**, *crino*

 
:   **greet**, *rinsa*

 
:   **grind**, *zalvi*

 
:   **groove**, *skuro*

 
:   **group**, *girzu*

 
:   **grow**, *banro*

 
:   **guess**, *smadi*

 
:   **guest**, *vitke*

 
:   **guide**, *gidva*

 
:   **guilt**, *zungi*

 
:   **guitar**, *jgita*

 
:   **gut**, *canti*

 
:   **gymnast**, *zajba*

### H

 
:   **hail**, *bratu*

 
:   **hair**, *kerfa*

 
:   **half**, *xadba*

 
:   **hammer**, *mruli*

 
:   **hand**, *xance*

 
:   **hang**, *dandu*

 
:   **happy**, *gleki*

 
:   **harmonious**, *sarxe*

 
:   **harvest**, *crepu*

 
:   **hate**, *xebni*

 
:   **head**, *stedu*

 
:   **healthy**, *kanro*

 
:   **heap**, *derxi*

 
:   **hear**, *tirna*

 
:   **heart**, *risna*

 
:   **heavy**, *tilju*

 
:   **Hebrew**, *xebro*

 
:   **heir**, *cerda*

 
:   **help**, *sidju*

 
:   **hemp**, *marna*

 
:   **high**, *galtu*

 
:   **Hindi**, *xindo*

 
:   **Hispanic**, *xispo*

 
:   **history**, *citri*

 
:   **hit**, *darxi*

 
:   **holy**, *censa*

 
:   **honest**, *stace*

 
:   **hoof**, *sufti*

 
:   **hook**, *genxu*

 
:   **hope**, *pacna*

 
:   **horn**, *jirna*

 
:   **horse**, *xirma*

 
:   **hospital**, *spita*

 
:   **hotel**, *xotli*

 
:   **hot**, *glare*

 
:   **hour**, *cacra*

 
:   **human**, *remna*

 
:   **humble**, *cumla*

 
:   **hundred, 100**, *xecto*

 
:   **hundredth, .01**, *centi*

 
:   **hunger**, *xagji*

 
:   **hunt**, *kalte*

 
:   **hydrogen**, *cidro*

### I

 
:   **ice**, *bisli*

 
:   **idea**, *sidbo*

 
:   **idle**, *cando*

 
:   **ill**, *bilma*

 
:   **illumine**, *gusni*

 
:   **imaginary**, *xanri*

 
:   **immaterial**, *mucti*

 
:   **immerse**, *jinru*

 
:   **important**, *vajni*

 
:   **increase**, *zenba*

 
:   **Indonesian**, *bindo*

 
:   **industry**, *gundi*

 
:   **infant**, *cifnu*

 
:   **infinite**, *cimni*

 
:   **influence**, *xlura*

 
:   **initiate**, *cfari*

 
:   **injure**, *xrani*

 
:   **ink**, *xinmo*

 
:   **innate**, *jinzi*

 
:   **insect**, *cinki*

 
:   **insert**, *setca*

 
:   **insure**, *binra*

 
:   **intense**, *carmi*

 
:   **interesting**, *cinri*

 
:   **interfere**, *zunti*

 
:   **interrupt**, *dicra*

 
:   **intersect**, *kruca*

 
:   **in**, *nenri*

 
:   **intuit**, *jijnu*

 
:   **invent**, *finti*

 
:   **invest**, *zivle*

 
:   **Iraqi**, *rakso*

 
:   **iron**, *tirse*

 
:   **irony**, *ranxi*

 
:   **irregular**, *vitci*

 
:   **Islamic**, *muslo*

 
:   **island**, *daplu*

### J

 
:   **Japanese**, *ponjo*

 
:   **jaw**, *xedja*

 
:   **jealous**, *jilra*

 
:   **Jehovist**, *jegvo*

 
:   **jelly**, *jduli*

 
:   **jet**, *jetce*

 
:   **job**, *jibri*

 
:   **joined**, *jorne*

 
:   **jointly**, *gunma*

 
:   **Jordanian**, *jordo*

 
:   **journal**, *karni*

 
:   **judge**, *pajni*

 
:   **juice**, *jisra*

### K

 
:   **kelvin**, *kelvo*

 
:   **key**, *ckiku*

 
:   **kick**, *tikpa*

 
:   **kill**, *catra*

 
:   **kind**, *xendo*

 
:   **kiss**, *cinba*

 
:   **knee**, *cidni*

 
:   **knife**, *dakfu*

 
:   **knit**, *nivji*

 
:   **knot**, *jgena*

 
:   **know**, *djuno*

### L

 
:   **label**, *tcita*

 
:   **lake**, *lalxu*

 
:   **land**, *tumla*

 
:   **language**, *bangu*

 
:   **late**, *lerci*

 
:   **Latin**, *latmo*

 
:   **laugh**, *cmila*

 
:   **launcher**, *cecla*

 
:   **law**, *flalu*

 
:   **layer**, *senta*

 
:   **lazy**, *lazni*

 
:   **lead**, *cnisa*

 
:   **leaf**, *pezli*

 
:   **leap**, *plipe*

 
:   **learn**, *cilre*

 
:   **leave**, *cliva*

 
:   **left**, *zunle*

 
:   **leg**, *tuple*

 
:   **lens**, *lenjo*

 
:   **less**, *mleca*

 
:   **letteral**, *lerfu*

 
:   **letter**, *xatra*

 
:   **let**, *curmi*

 
:   **level**, *pinta*

 
:   **lever**, *vraga*

 
:   **levity**, *xalbo*

 
:   **lift**, *lafti*

 
:   **lightning**, *lindi*

 
:   **lightweight**, *linto*

 
:   **limit**, *jimte*

 
:   **linen**, *matli*

 
:   **line**, *linji*

 
:   **lion**, *cinfo*

 
:   **lip**, *ctebi*

 
:   **liquid**, *litki*

 
:   **liquor**, *jikru*

 
:   **list**, *liste*

 
:   **liter**, *litce*

 
:   **liver**, *livga*

 
:   **live**, *jmive*

 
:   **local**, *diklo*

 
:   **lock**, *stela*

 
:   **logarithm**, *dugri*

 
:   **logic**, *logji*

 
:   **Lojbanic**, *lojbo*

 
:   **long**, *clani*

 
:   **look**, *catlu*

 
:   **loop**, *clupa*

 
:   **loose**, *kluza*

 
:   **lose**, *cirko*

 
:   **lotus**, *latna*

 
:   **loud**, *cladu*

 
:   **louse**, *civla*

 
:   **love**, *prami*

 
:   **low**, *dizlo*

 
:   **luck**, *funca*

 
:   **lunar**, *lunra*

 
:   **lung**, *fepri*

### M

 
:   **machine**, *minji*

 
:   **magenta**, *nukni*

 
:   **magic**, *makfa*

 
:   **magnet**, *maksi*

 
:   **mail**, *mrilu*

 
:   **maize**, *zumri*

 
:   **make**, *zbasu*

 
:   **Malay-Indonesian**, *baxso*

 
:   **Malaysian**, *meljo*

 
:   **male**, *nakni*

 
:   **mammal**, *mabru*

 
:   **man**, *nanmu*

 
:   **market**, *zarci*

 
:   **mark**, *barna*

 
:   **married**, *speni*

 
:   **mash**, *marxa*

 
:   **match**, *sacki*

 
:   **material**, *marji*

 
:   **mathematics**, *cmaci*

 
:   **mat**, *matci*

 
:   **mature**, *makcu*

 
:   **meal**, *sanmi*

 
:   **meaning**, *smuni*

 
:   **measure**, *merli*

 
:   **meat**, *rectu*

 
:   **meet**, *penmi*

 
:   **melon**, *guzme*

 
:   **melt**, *runme*

 
:   **member**, *cmima*

 
:   **mercury**, *margu*

 
:   **message**, *notci*

 
:   **metal**, *jinme*

 
:   **meter**, *mitre*

 
:   **method**, *tadji*

 
:   **Mexican**, *mexno*

 
:   **MEX**, *mekso*

 
:   **micro, 1E-6**, *mikri*

 
:   **middle**, *midju*

 
:   **mild**, *milxe*

 
:   **mile**, *minli*

 
:   **military**, *bilni*

 
:   **milk**, *ladru*

 
:   **millet**, *cunmi*

 
:   **million, 1E6**, *megdo*

 
:   **mill**, *molki*

 
:   **mind**, *menli*

 
:   **mineral**, *kunra*

 
:   **minute**, *mentu*

 
:   **miscellaneous**, *vrici*

 
:   **mixture**, *mixre*

 
:   **moan**, *cmoni*

 
:   **modify**, *galfi*

 
:   **moist**, *cilmo*

 
:   **mold**, *mledi*

 
:   **mole**, *molro*

 
:   **money**, *jdini*

 
:   **monkey**, *smani*

 
:   **month**, *masti*

 
:   **morals**, *marde*

 
:   **more**, *zmadu*

 
:   **morning**, *cerni*

 
:   **mossy**, *clika*

 
:   **mother**, *mamta*

 
:   **motive**, *mukti*

 
:   **motor**, *matra*

 
:   **mountain**, *cmana*

 
:   **mouse**, *smacu*

 
:   **mouth**, *moklu*

 
:   **move**, *muvdu*

 
:   **much**, *mutce*

 
:   **multiply**, *pilji*

 
:   **muscle**, *sluji*

 
:   **museum**, *muzga*

 
:   **music**, *zgike*

 
:   **mutual**, *simxu*

 
:   **myth**, *ranmi*

### N

 
:   **nail**, *dinko*

 
:   **name**, *cmene*

 
:   **nano, 1E-9**, *nanvi*

 
:   **narrow**, *jarki*

 
:   **nation**, *natmi*

 
:   **natural**, *rarna*

 
:   **near**, *jibni*

 
:   **necessary**, *sarcu*

 
:   **necessitate**, *nibli*

 
:   **neck**, *cnebo*

 
:   **needle**, *jesni*

 
:   **need**, *nitcu*

 
:   **neon**, *navni*

 
:   **nerve**, *nirna*

 
:   **nervous**, *xanka*

 
:   **nest**, *zdani*

 
:   **net**, *julne*

 
:   **neutral**, *nutli*

 
:   **news**, *nuzba*

 
:   **new**, *cnino*

 
:   **nickel**, *nikle*

 
:   **night**, *nicte*

 
:   **nitrogen**, *trano*

 
:   **noble**, *nobli*

 
:   **noise**, *savru*

 
:   **norm**, *cnano*

 
:   **North American**, *bemro*

 
:   **north**, *berti*

 
:   **nose**, *nazbi*

 
:   **now**, *cabna*

 
:   **number**, *namcu*

 
:   **nut**, *narge*

### O

 
:   **oak**, *cindu*

 
:   **oats**, *mavji*

 
:   **obey**, *tinbe*

 
:   **object**, *dacti*

 
:   **obliged**, *bilga*

 
:   **observe**, *zgana*

 
:   **odor**, *panci*

 
:   **offer**, *friti*

 
:   **office**, *briju*

 
:   **offspring**, *panzi*

 
:   **often**, *cafne*

 
:   **old**, *slabu*

 
:   **onion**, *sluni*

 
:   **open**, *kalri*

 
:   **operate**, *sazri*

 
:   **opine**, *jinvi*

 
:   **oppose**, *fapro*

 
:   **opposite**, *dukti*

 
:   **orange**, *narju*

 
:   **orderly**, *cnici*

 
:   **ordinary**, *fadni*

 
:   **organize**, *ganzu*

 
:   **organ**, *rango*

 
:   **oscillate**, *slilu*

 
:   **other**, *drata*

 
:   **outer space**, *kensa*

 
:   **out**, *bartu*

 
:   **oven**, *toknu*

 
:   **owe**, *dejni*

 
:   **oxygen**, *kijno*

### P

 
:   **page**, *papri*

 
:   **pain**, *cortu*

 
:   **paint**, *cinta*

 
:   **Pakistani**, *kisto*

 
:   **Palestinian**, *filso*

 
:   **panic**, *xalni*

 
:   **pan**, *tansi*

 
:   **pants**, *palku*

 
:   **paper**, *pelji*

 
:   **parallel**, *panra*

 
:   **parent**, *rirni*

 
:   **park**, *panka*

 
:   **part**, *pagbu*

 
:   **passport**, *jaspu*

 
:   **pass through**, *pagre*

 
:   **paste**, *pesxu*

 
:   **past**, *purci*

 
:   **pattern**, *morna*

 
:   **pay**, *pleji*

 
:   **peace**, *panpi*

 
:   **pear**, *perli*

 
:   **pedestal**, *zbepi*

 
:   **pelt**, *skapi*

 
:   **pencil**, *pinsi*

 
:   **penis**, *pinji*

 
:   **pen**, *penbi*

 
:   **perfect**, *prane*

 
:   **perform**, *tigni*

 
:   **peril**, *ckape*

 
:   **permanent**, *vitno*

 
:   **person**, *prenu*

 
:   **pertain**, *srana*

 
:   **petroleum**, *ctile*

 
:   **phrase compound**, *tanru*

 
:   **piano**, *pipno*

 
:   **picture**, *pixra*

 
:   **piece**, *spisa*

 
:   **pig**, *xarju*

 
:   **pin**, *pijne*

 
:   **pity**, *kecti*

 
:   **plane**, *plita*

 
:   **planet**, *plini*

 
:   **plan**, *platu*

 
:   **plant**, *spati*

 
:   **plastic**, *slasi*

 
:   **plate**, *palta*

 
:   **play**, *kelci*

 
:   **pleasant**, *pluka*

 
:   **plow**, *plixa*

 
:   **plump**, *plana*

 
:   **pocket**, *daski*

 
:   **poem**, *pemci*

 
:   **point**, *mokca*

 
:   **poison**, *vindu*

 
:   **poke**, *tunta*

 
:   **police**, *pulji*

 
:   **polish**, *spali*

 
:   **polite**, *clite*

 
:   **polity**, *jecta*

 
:   **poor**, *pindi*

 
:   **Portuguese**, *porto*

 
:   **possess**, *ponse*

 
:   **possible**, *cumki*

 
:   **potato**, *patlu*

 
:   **pot**, *patxu*

 
:   **pound**, *bunda*

 
:   **powder**, *purmo*

 
:   **powerful**, *vlipa*

 
:   **precede**, *lidne*

 
:   **predicate**, *bridi*

 
:   **pressure**, *danre*

 
:   **prevent**, *fanta*

 
:   **price**, *jdima*

 
:   **pride**, *jgira*

 
:   **principal**, *ralju*

 
:   **print**, *prina*

 
:   **prisoner**, *pinfu*

 
:   **private**, *sivni*

 
:   **probable**, *lakne*

 
:   **problem**, *nabmi*

 
:   **process**, *pruce*

 
:   **procreate**, *rorci*

 
:   **produce**, *cupra*

 
:   **profit**, *prali*

 
:   **projectile**, *danti*

 
:   **promise**, *nupre*

 
:   **prose**, *prosa*

 
:   **protein**, *lanbi*

 
:   **protest**, *pante*

 
:   **provide**, *sabji*

 
:   **pubic**, *plibu*

 
:   **public**, *gubni*

 
:   **pull**, *lacpu*

 
:   **pump**, *pambe*

 
:   **punctuate**, *pandi*

 
:   **pungent**, *cpina*

 
:   **punish**, *sfasa*

 
:   **pure**, *curve*

 
:   **purple**, *zirpu*

 
:   **put**, *punji*

### Q

 
:   **quality**, *ckaji*

 
:   **quantity**, *klani*

 
:   **quantum**, *kantu*

 
:   **question**, *preti*

 
:   **quiet**, *smaji*

### R

 
:   **rabbit**, *ractu*

 
:   **radian**, *radno*

 
:   **radiate**, *dirce*

 
:   **radio**, *cradi*

 
:   **rail**, *garna*

 
:   **rain**, *carvi*

 
:   **random**, *cunso*

 
:   **range**, *kuspe*

 
:   **rare**, *rirci*

 
:   **ratio**, *parbi*

 
:   **rat**, *ratcu*

 
:   **react**, *frati*

 
:   **read**, *tcidu*

 
:   **ready**, *bredi*

 
:   **reason**, *krinu*

 
:   **reclining**, *vreta*

 
:   **record**, *vreji*

 
:   **recur**, *krefu*

 
:   **red**, *xunre*

 
:   **reed**, *xagri*

 
:   **reference**, *manri*

 
:   **reflect**, *minra*

 
:   **regret**, *xenru*

 
:   **regular**, *dikni*

 
:   **related**, *ckini*

 
:   **relax**, *surla*

 
:   **religion**, *lijda*

 
:   **rely**, *lacri*

 
:   **remain**, *stali*

 
:   **remember**, *morji*

 
:   **remove**, *vimcu*

 
:   **repair**, *cikre*

 
:   **repeat**, *rapli*

 
:   **replace**, *basti*

 
:   **reply**, *spuda*

 
:   **represent**, *krati*

 
:   **reptile**, *respa*

 
:   **request**, *cpedu*

 
:   **responsible**, *fuzme*

 
:   **restaurant**, *gusta*

 
:   **restrain**, *rinju*

 
:   **result**, *jalge*

 
:   **retain**, *ralte*

 
:   **return**, *xruti*

 
:   **revenge**, *venfu*

 
:   **reverse**, *fatne*

 
:   **reward**, *cnemu*

 
:   **rhyme**, *rimni*

 
:   **rhythm**, *rilti*

 
:   **ribbon**, *dasri*

 
:   **rice**, *rismi*

 
:   **rich**, *ricfu*

 
:   **ridicule**, *ckasu*

 
:   **right**, *pritu*

 
:   **ring**, *djine*

 
:   **rite**, *ritli*

 
:   **river**, *rirxe*

 
:   **road**, *dargu*

 
:   **robe**, *pastu*

 
:   **rocket**, *jakne*

 
:   **rock**, *rokci*

 
:   **rod**, *grana*

 
:   **roll**, *gunro*

 
:   **roof**, *drudi*

 
:   **room**, *kumfa*

 
:   **root**, *genja*

 
:   **root word**, *gismu*

 
:   **rose**, *rozgu*

 
:   **rotten**, *fusra*

 
:   **rough**, *rufsu*

 
:   **round**, *cukla*

 
:   **route**, *pluta*

 
:   **rubber**, *ckabu*

 
:   **rule**, *javni*

 
:   **run**, *bajra*

 
:   **rural**, *nurma*

 
:   **Russian**, *rusko*

 
:   **rye**, *mraji*

### S

 
:   **sack**, *dakli*

 
:   **sad**, *badri*

 
:   **sail**, *falnu*

 
:   **salad**, *salta*

 
:   **salt**, *silna*

 
:   **same**, *mintu*

 
:   **sand**, *canre*

 
:   **sandwich**, *snuji*

 
:   **sane**, *racli*

 
:   **satellite**, *mluni*

 
:   **satisfy**, *mansa*

 
:   **sauce**, *sanso*

 
:   **scale**, *ckilu*

 
:   **school**, *ckule*

 
:   **science**, *saske*

 
:   **Scottish**, *skoto*

 
:   **scrape**, *guska*

 
:   **scratch**, *sraku*

 
:   **screw**, *klupe*

 
:   **seasoning**, *tsapi*

 
:   **season**, *citsi*

 
:   **sea**, *xamsi*

 
:   **second**, *snidu*

 
:   **secret**, *mipri*

 
:   **secure**, *snura*

 
:   **seed**, *tsiju*

 
:   **seek**, *sisku*

 
:   **seem**, *simlu*

 
:   **see**, *viska*

 
:   **self**, *sevzi*

 
:   **sell**, *vecnu*

 
:   **sense**, *ganse*

 
:   **sentence**, *jufra*

 
:   **sequence**, *porsi*

 
:   **serious**, *junri*

 
:   **serve**, *selfu*

 
:   **severe**, *jursa*

 
:   **sew**, *fenso*

 
:   **sexual**, *cinse*

 
:   **shadow**, *ctino*

 
:   **shake**, *desku*

 
:   **shallow**, *caxno*

 
:   **shape**, *tarmi*

 
:   **sharp**, *kinli*

 
:   **shears**, *jinci*

 
:   **sheep**, *lanme*

 
:   **sheet**, *boxfo*

 
:   **shelf**, *kajna*

 
:   **shell**, *calku*

 
:   **shelter**, *marbi*

 
:   **shirt**, *creka*

 
:   **shoal**, *jmifa*

 
:   **shock**, *jenca*

 
:   **shoe**, *cutci*

 
:   **short**, *tordu*

 
:   **shoulder**, *janco*

 
:   **shovel**, *canpa*

 
:   **shove**, *catke*

 
:   **show**, *jarco*

 
:   **sibling**, *tunba*

 
:   **side**, *mlana*

 
:   **sign**, *sinxa*

 
:   **silk**, *silka*

 
:   **silver**, *rijno*

 
:   **similar**, *simsa*

 
:   **simple**, *sampu*

 
:   **sine**, *sinso*

 
:   **sing**, *sanga*

 
:   **sister**, *mensi*

 
:   **site**, *stuzi*

 
:   **sit**, *zutse*

 
:   **situation**, *tcini*

 
:   **skirt**, *skaci*

 
:   **ski**, *skiji*

 
:   **sky**, *tsani*

 
:   **Slavic**, *slovo*

 
:   **sleep**, *sipna*

 
:   **slice**, *panlo*

 
:   **slide**, *sakli*

 
:   **slope**, *salpo*

 
:   **slow**, *masno*

 
:   **small**, *cmalu*

 
:   **smell**, *sumne*

 
:   **smile**, *cisma*

 
:   **smoke**, *danmo*

 
:   **smooth**, *xutla*

 
:   **snake**, *since*

 
:   **sneeze**, *senci*

 
:   **snow**, *snime*

 
:   **snug**, *tagji*

 
:   **soak up**, *cokcu*

 
:   **soap**, *zbabu*

 
:   **socialize**, *jikca*

 
:   **sock**, *smoka*

 
:   **soda**, *sodva*

 
:   **sodium**, *sodna*

 
:   **sofa**, *sfofa*

 
:   **soft**, *ranti*

 
:   **solar**, *solri*

 
:   **soldier**, *sonci*

 
:   **solid**, *sligu*

 
:   **son**, *bersa*

 
:   **sorghum**, *sorgu*

 
:   **sound**, *sance*

 
:   **soup**, *stasu*

 
:   **source**, *krasi*

 
:   **sour**, *slari*

 
:   **South American**, *ketco*

 
:   **south**, *snanu*

 
:   **Soviet**, *softo*

 
:   **sow**, *sombo*

 
:   **soya**, *sobde*

 
:   **space**, *canlu*

 
:   **Spanish**, *spano*

 
:   **species**, *jutsi*

 
:   **specific**, *steci*

 
:   **spider**, *jukni*

 
:   **spiral**, *sarlu*

 
:   **spirit**, *pruxi*

 
:   **spit**, *sputu*

 
:   **sponge**, *panje*

 
:   **spoon**, *smuci*

 
:   **spread**, *preja*

 
:   **spring**, *vensa*

 
:   **square**, *kurfa*

 
:   **stage**, *tsina*

 
:   **stairs**, *serti*

 
:   **stalk**, *stani*

 
:   **stand**, *sanli*

 
:   **starch**, *jalna*

 
:   **star**, *tarci*

 
:   **station**, *tcana*

 
:   **steel**, *gasta*

 
:   **step**, *stapa*

 
:   **steradian**, *stero*

 
:   **sticky**, *snipa*

 
:   **stiff**, *tinsa*

 
:   **stir**, *jicla*

 
:   **store**, *sorcu*

 
:   **story**, *lisri*

 
:   **straight**, *sirji*

 
:   **strange**, *cizra*

 
:   **street**, *klaji*

 
:   **stretch**, *tcena*

 
:   **stroke**, *satre*

 
:   **strong**, *tsali*

 
:   **structure**, *stura*

 
:   **structure word**, *cmavo*

 
:   **stubborn**, *xarnu*

 
:   **study**, *tadni*

 
:   **suburb**, *jarbu*

 
:   **succeed**, *snada*

 
:   **suck**, *sakci*

 
:   **sudden**, *suksa*

 
:   **suffice**, *banzu*

 
:   **sugar**, *sakta*

 
:   **suggest**, *stidi*

 
:   **sulfur**, *sliri*

 
:   **summer**, *crisa*

 
:   **sum**, *sumji*

 
:   **superlative**, *traji*

 
:   **support**, *sarji*

 
:   **surface**, *sefta*

 
:   **surprise**, *spaji*

 
:   **surround**, *sruri*

 
:   **survive**, *renvi*

 
:   **swallow**, *tunlo*

 
:   **sweat**, *xasne*

 
:   **sweet**, *titla*

 
:   **swelling**, *punli*

 
:   **swim**, *limna*

 
:   **syllable**, *slaka*

 
:   **Syrian**, *sirxo*

 
:   **system**, *ciste*

### T

 
:   **table**, *jubme*

 
:   **tail**, *rebla*

 
:   **take care of**, *kurji*

 
:   **take**, *lebna*

 
:   **talent**, *stati*

 
:   **talk**, *tavla*

 
:   **tangent**, *tanjo*

 
:   **Taoist**, *dadjo*

 
:   **tar**, *tarla*

 
:   **taste**, *vrusi*

 
:   **taut**, *trati*

 
:   **tax**, *cteki*

 
:   **teach**, *ctuca*

 
:   **tea**, *tcati*

 
:   **telephone**, *fonxa*

 
:   **television**, *tivni*

 
:   **temple**, *malsi*

 
:   **temporary**, *zasni*

 
:   **ten, 10**, *dekto*

 
:   **tenth, .1**, *decti*

 
:   **tera, 1E12**, *terto*

 
:   **territory**, *tutra*

 
:   **testicle**, *ganti*

 
:   **test**, *cipra*

 
:   **texture**, *tengu*

 
:   **thick**, *rotsu*

 
:   **think**, *pensi*

 
:   **thin**, *cinla*

 
:   **thirst**, *taske*

 
:   **thousand, 1000**, *kilto*

 
:   **thousandth, .001**, *milti*

 
:   **thread**, *cilta*

 
:   **throat**, *galxe*

 
:   **throw**, *renro*

 
:   **thumb**, *tamji*

 
:   **ticket**, *pikta*

 
:   **tide**, *ctaru*

 
:   **tiger**, *tirxu*

 
:   **tile**, *tapla*

 
:   **time of day**, *tcika*

 
:   **time**, *temci*

 
:   **tin**, *tinci*

 
:   **tip**, *jipno*

 
:   **tired**, *tatpi*

 
:   **tobacco**, *tanko*

 
:   **tomato**, *tamca*

 
:   **tone**, *tonga*

 
:   **tongs**, *cinza*

 
:   **tongue**, *tance*

 
:   **tool**, *tutci*

 
:   **tooth**, *denci*

 
:   **touch**, *pencu*

 
:   **tragedy**, *betri*

 
:   **train**, *trene*

 
:   **transfer**, *benji*

 
:   **translate**, *fanva*

 
:   **travel**, *litru*

 
:   **tree**, *tricu*

 
:   **trouble**, *raktu*

 
:   **true**, *jetnu*

 
:   **trumpet**, *tabra*

 
:   **try**, *troci*

 
:   **tube**, *tubnu*

 
:   **tulip**, *tujli*

 
:   **turkey**, *xruki*

 
:   **turn**, *carna*

 
:   **twist**, *torni*

### U

 
:   **Ukrainian**, *vukro*

 
:   **umbrella**, *santa*

 
:   **understand**, *jimpe*

 
:   **uniform**, *manfo*

 
:   **unit**, *gradu*

 
:   **universe**, *munje*

 
:   **upon**, *cpana*

 
:   **Urdu**, *xurdo*

 
:   **urine**, *pinca*

 
:   **use**, *pilno*

 
:   **use up**, *xaksu*

 
:   **utter**, *bacru*

### V

 
:   **vaccine**, *jinku*

 
:   **vagina**, *vibna*

 
:   **value**, *vamji*

 
:   **vanish**, *canci*

 
:   **vary**, *cenba*

 
:   **vegetable**, *stagi*

 
:   **vehicle**, *marce*

 
:   **vertical**, *sraji*

 
:   **video**, *vidni*

 
:   **view**, *jvinu*

 
:   **violent**, *vlile*

 
:   **virtue**, *vrude*

 
:   **virus**, *vidru*

 
:   **viscous**, *viknu*

 
:   **voice**, *voksa*

 
:   **vomit**, *vamtu*

 
:   **vulva**, *vlagi*

### W

 
:   **wait**, *denpa*

 
:   **walk**, *cadzu*

 
:   **wall**, *bitmu*

 
:   **warn**, *kajde*

 
:   **war**, *jamna*

 
:   **wash**, *lumci*

 
:   **waste**, *festi*

 
:   **water**, *djacu*

 
:   **wave**, *boxna*

 
:   **wax**, *lakse*

 
:   **weak**, *ruble*

 
:   **weapon**, *xarci*

 
:   **wear**, *dasni*

 
:   **weather**, *tcima*

 
:   **weave**, *jivbu*

 
:   **wedge**, *cfine*

 
:   **week**, *jeftu*

 
:   **weep**, *klaku*

 
:   **weight**, *junta*

 
:   **well**, *jinto*

 
:   **west**, *stici*

 
:   **wheat**, *maxri*

 
:   **wheel**, *xislu*

 
:   **whip**, *bikla*

 
:   **whistle**, *siclu*

 
:   **white**, *blabi*

 
:   **wild**, *cilce*

 
:   **window**, *canko*

 
:   **wine**, *vanju*

 
:   **wing**, *nalci*

 
:   **winter**, *dunra*

 
:   **win**, *jinga*

 
:   **wise**, *prije*

 
:   **without**, *claxu*

 
:   **with**, *kansa*

 
:   **wolf**, *labno*

 
:   **woman**, *ninmu*

 
:   **womb**, *gutra*

 
:   **wonder**, *manci*

 
:   **wood**, *mudri*

 
:   **wool**, *sunla*

 
:   **word**, *valsi*

 
:   **work**, *gunka*

 
:   **worm**, *curnu*

 
:   **wrinkle**, *cinje*

 
:   **write**, *ciska*

### X

 
:   **x~1~**, *broda*

 
:   **x~2~**, *brode*

 
:   **x~3~**, *brodi*

 
:   **x~4~**, *brodo*

 
:   **x~5~**, *brodu*

### Y

 
:   **year**, *nanca*

 
:   **yellow**, *pelxu*

 
:   **yield**, *randa*

 
:   **yotta, 1E24**, *gotro*

 
:   **young**, *citno*

### Z

 
:   **zetta, 1E21**, *zetro*

 
:   **zinc**, *zinki*

Abbreviations
=============

ISO 639-1 Codes
---------------

These are codes used throughout this book.

 
:   Arabic: **ar**

 
:   Chinese: **zh**

 
:   English: **en**

 
:   Hindi: **hi**

 
:   Russian: **ru**

 
:   Spanish: **es**

<span>9</span> John Woldemar Cowan *The Complete Lojban Language*,
Logical Language Group, Version 1.1, 2016-04-12,
[lojban.github.io](https://lojban.github.io/cll/). Frederic M. Wheelock,
*Wheelock’s Latin*, HarperCollins Publishers, New York, 6th edition,
revised, 2005. Steven Pinker, *Linguistics as a Window to Understanding
the Brain*, The Floating University, 2011,
[www.youtube.com](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q-B_ONJIEcE). James
Cooke Brown, *Loglan*, Scientific American, Volume 202, Number 6, pp. 53
- 63, 1960,
[members.home.nl](http://members.home.nl/w.dijkhuis/loglan_jcb/Brown_JC_loglan.html).

Last Note
=========

[^1]: Wikipedia has an
    [article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top-down_and_bottom-up_design)
    about top-down and bottom-up design which may give more context for
    this distinction.

[^2]: Being based on another language makes Loglan an *a posteriori*
    language. See [this Wikipedia
    article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructed_language#a_posteriori_language)
    for more on constructed, *a posteriori* languages.

[^3]: For more about Lojban orthography, see *The Complete Lojban
    Language* @CLL [Chapter 3, p. 33]

[^4]: *Ghoti* dates back to, at the latest, 1855. Wikipedia has an
    [article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghoti) on this topic for
    further reading.

[^5]: For a full list of ISO 639-1 codes, see [this Wikipedia
    article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes)

